Magnetism is not the same as electricity. To most people this must seem like a
completely obvious statement, we usually think of magnetism as that which
makes tiny little metal pieces stick to one another like fridge magnets, while
electricity has to do with the currents running through our power outlets and
appliances. To the physicist however who has studied the laws of
electromagnetism, Maxwell's four equations, the two things look almost
precisely the same. 

Almost is a key word here, and it is one of these key differences which
motivate the work that I have done. It just so turns out, that we cannot seem
to find any magnetic 'charge' in the universe, the same way that electrical
charge is plenty. There are for example electrons everywhere, "sources" of
electrical fields, that lack any sense of "up", "down" or any orientation at
all for that matter. When it comes to magnets all sources of fields lack
net "magnetic charge" but instead have two poles, two sides, that contribute
in opposite manner to the field. A bar magnet is a typical example of this,
there is a norh pole, usually colored red, opposite to a south pole and we
/cannot/ separate these. If we try to split the positive north pole from the
south nature disagrees and we are once again left two ends to each magnet, two
/dipoles/ as we call them.

That thing which we cannot find, something which emanates a magnetic field in
the same way that an electron emanates an electric field, would be what is
called a magnetic monopole. There is a caveat to that statement, for we have
actually found things that behave much like magnetic monopoles, but which
aren't "fundamental Maxwellian monopoles". Whatever those words mean mustn't
be too much cause for concern. Just remember that 'proper' magnetic monopoles
do not exist, but theres many things that share properties of magnetic
monopoles.

One such case, a rather obscure one if I'm to be honest, is what I will call
"synthetic" magnetic monopoles. Certain methods to solving quantum mechanical
systems give rise to these. They do not exactly create magnetic fields in the
usual sense, but they create something called a synthetic field which acts a
lot as if it were our standard magnetic field. My project then, at last, has
been to try and find out in precisely which manner these synthetic magnetic
monopoles affect our world.

To achieve this I have modeled some scenario, a system as I will often call it,
which displays synthetic magnetic monopoles. Thankfully this system is, at
least from my viewpoint, not too advanced so I will give my best at trying to
describe it to you. Imagine two weights, masses, that are stuck together by
some stick in between them. This is a dumbbell more or less, the kind used for
weight lifting, and I will often call it by that name. If a dumbbell is thrown
it will fly through the air and possibly rotate as well. This is all pretty
standard and certainly does not give us magnetic monopoles, so let us also
consider each mass of the dumbbell to be a magnetic dipole. We can think of
this as sticking a bar magnet onto each end of the dumbbell, if we make sure
that those bar magnets can rotate freely. Actually, regular bar magnets don't
quite do the trick we require, so the dipoles are more precisely quantum
mechanical "spins". If you have studied quantum mechanics you probably know
what this means. If you have not, and I do not assume that you have,
describing this would take far more than the fifteenn minutes allotted to me.
Just think of it as bar magnets that don't quite behave as you would expect.

Now, what happens if this dumbbell is thrown, just not through the air, but
through an external magnetic field? Since the dumbbell is basically a big
magnet, it will be attracted or repelled by the magnetic field, just as if we
move a bar magnet next to another they will affect each other. Precisely how
the dumbbell is magnetic depends on the rotation of both dipoles though, and
also on the rotation of the entire dumbbell, and to add to that we must solve
everything quantum mechanically since the dipoles are actually spins. What
path will the dumbell take through space, and what will be the rotation of
each component at each point in time? Perhaps
it isn't too hard to convince you that this is a somewhat difficult problem. 

As almost always in physics everything works out in the end if you just find
the right approximations, the right assumptions that simplify the problem.
Here something called the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is taken. I will not
detail what this means in full, but it is here that the synthetic field
enters, and with it the synthetic magnetic monopole.

Some code had to be written to simulate the motion of dumbbells through
magnetic fields, but this thankfully also means some neat plots of the motion. 

[bla bla välj bra plots]

What the synthetic magnetic monopole turns out to do is change, correct, the
motion of the dumbbell from an otherwise 'naive' solution of the motion. A
main result is however that it turns out to be very hard to adjust the size of
this correction. The force from the synthetic magnetic monopole is more or
less constant, so the main way of letting it affect the system more is
reducing the mass of the dumbbell. For this "high energy" case then notable
correction was found for masses of about a hydrogen atom. This is of course
very small, but it isn't unreasonably small. Another scenario explored in this
project required a dumbbell mass about a hundred times smaller, which is
completely unreasonable by comparison.

A large obstacle left to tackle is how this correction of motion is actually
then supposed to be put in correspondence with monopoles specifically. We see
that the synthetic field disturbs the motion, sure, but can we figure out that
it is a magnetic monopole which sits behind the scene pulling the strings?
There are several technical difficulties present here which must be solved if
the premise of the project is to be fulfilled completely.

This then constitutes one of the further developments possible. Other things
that can be done in the future include optimization of the code. The
simulations are presently rather limited by performance, but this could also
be alleviated through using better hardware and infrastructure for the
calculations. The simulations shown earlier were done on my rather low-tier
laptop, so access to for example UPPMAX could possibly fix these problems
rather instantly.

Finally it would be interesting to figure out some experimental setup which
could be described by the dumbbell model. Nothing encountered so far seems to
hinder such an effort, and rather points to that something as simple as
hydrogen gas could do the trick.
